RFC : CDEvents Webhook Adapter design review (#42)
cdevents/community: rfc/cdevents-translator.md

Different translator plugins can be implemented that communicates over a gRPC connection.

- Example structure of `cdevents-translator` interface
````go
package cdeventstranslator

type EventTranslator interface {
	TranslateEvent()
}
````

#### Implement gerrit-translator-cdevents plugin
Plugin with the name `gerrit-translator-cdevents` will be created in a separate repo/package.</br>
GerritTranslator needs to implement the `cdeventstranslator.EventTranslator` interface to handle the translation from Gerrit event to CDEvent and that communicates over a gRPC connection.</br>
Call `plugin.Serve` to serve a plugin from the main function to GRPC server using hashicorp's go-plugin

Build the `gerrit-translator-cdevents` plugin using `go build`, so that the plugin can be loaded/used from other Golang main application to `TranslateEvent`

- Example structure of `gerrit-translator-cdevents` plugin:
````go
package main

type GerritTranslator struct {
   //Fields for Gerrit event Translator
}

func (translator *GerritTranslator) TranslateEvent(event string) {

> 	//handle translate Gerrit event to CDEvent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// handle translate Gerrit event to CDEvent
```

service EventTranslator {
  rpc TranslateEvent (TranslateRequest) returns (TranslateResponse);
}
````

The GRPC client/server will help to handle `EventTranslator` service request/response over GRPC by using the proto generated files.

````go
package cdeventstranslator

type GRPCClient struct {
   //init client
}

func (m *GRPCClient) TranslateEvent(event string) error {
	_, err := m.client.TranslateEvent(context.Background(), &proto.TranslateRequest{Event: event})
	return err
}

type GRPCServer struct {
	//init server
}

func (m *GRPCServer) TranslateEvent(ctx context.Context, req *proto.TranslateRequest) (*proto.Empty, error) {
	return &proto.Empty{}, m.Impl.TranslateEvent(req.Event)
}

````

The GRPC client/server implementations can be [generated in other languages](https://protobuf.dev/getting-started/), to enable Cross-language support for Plugins implemented.</br>
Plugin users use `plugin.Client` to launch a subprocess and request an interface implementation using hashicorp's go-plugin over RPC.</br>
More detailed implementation can be referred from HashiCorp's go-plugin [gRPC examples](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin/tree/main/examples/grpc) 

#### Pros and Cons

> - This structure allows you to have a main application that dynamically loads and communicates with different translator plugins over gRPC.

Reviewer: Kind of. It really depends on the design. For instance, how hashicorp does this is they have the main translator start all the grpc, e.g. forking processes.

> - The plugins can be developed independently and reside in separate repositories.</br>

Reviewer 2: If I'm not mistaken, this is the same for all options, so while it's a pro, it's not a differentiator...

NIT: </br> at the end?

Author: Agree, removing it from here and also it is mentioned in the each approach description.

> - HashiCorp's `go-plugin` library developed under Mozilla Public License.

Reviewer 2: Is this a pro or a cons? The Mozilla license is recognised by OSI https://opensource.org/license/mpl-2-0/ - do you see an issue with it?

## CDEvents Translator

### Overview:
This proposal describes translating events from various source control systems into CDEvents and sending them to configured message-broker, by using a common cdevents-translator 

> A library cdevents-translator will be developed to receive various event types and convert them into CDEvents.

Reviewer 2: How this will work in terms of supporting multiple types?
Will the library provide an interface that various implementors can implement independently?

Author: yes an interface `EventTranslator` will be created with the implementation needed for `TranslateEvent()` for different source of events(GitHub/Gerrit`/...etc)

````go
type EventTranslator interface {
	TranslateEvent()
}
````
And will have a common methods to create and send CDEvents, will update the design as per this.

Various types of source code version control systems like GitHub, Gerrit and Gitlab endpoints/webhooks can be configured and implemented with in the cdevents-translator.

Instructions for configuring Gerrit webhooks and implementation details can be found in [gerrit-cdevent](gerrit-cdevents.md) 

### Design approach

> Create a Golang application with an API server configured to initialize SCM systems webhooks/endpoints to receive events and translate them into CDEvents.

Reviewer 2: The following just for info.

Tekton Triggers provides and API server that can reply to webhooks. It supports incoming `CloudEvents` as well as generic webhooks and it provides a powerful templating mechanism to extract information from incoming payloads and produce a YAML out of them. I used it in this POC https://github.com/afrittoli/cdeventer.

The approach of CDEventer is a bit more complex, but it has the advantage of decoupling the processing of incoming messages, which is then implemented as a set of input specific `TriggerBindings`, from the actual sending of the target CDEvents, through the use of an intermediate YAML.

The downside of CDEventer is the extra dependency to Tekton (and thus K8s).

## CDEvents Translator

> ### Overview:

Author: Thank you @xibz for reviewing this and sharing your approaches.
As discussed over call, looking into these proposals and trying to explore a bit to update the design doc with more details on these approaches.

> ### Overview:

Author: Updated the design as per the discussion with different approaches. Please review and share your comments. 
we can meet and discuss further.

> ### Overview:

Reviewer 2: ok to resolve this one now?

### Motivation and Rationale
In establishing the fundamental principles of CDEvents, a key objective is to ensure that events are sent directly from their source or as close to the source as feasible.</br> 
Recognizing the challenge of achieving universal adaptation among all tools and systems to send CDEvents, there arises a need to bridge this gap.</br>
To address this, the `cdevents-translator` will be implemented. This translator is designed to translate and send CDEvents to a message-broker, for various SCM systems.

### Goals

- The translators will be implemented for tools that support sending events over the HTTP protocol with webhook capabilities
- Implement support for one-way translation only; that is, translating events from different SCM systems to CDEvents
- The translators will be implemented to translate only [Source Code Control](https://cdevents.dev/docs/source-code-version-control/) type CDEvents
- Create shared packages/interfaces that will be commonly used for translating and sending CDEvents. 
- Finalize one of the three approaches and utilize the `cdevents-translator` library to implement the Gerrit translator initially.

### Non-Goals

> - Implement translators for other SCM systems or any applications requiring translation to CDEvents

Reviewer 3: I thought this proposal intends to potentially provide support for any SCM system, but no other system
```suggestion
- Implement translators for other applications (non-SCM systems) requiring translation to CDEvents
```

   http.HandleFunc("/translate/gerrit-webhooks", gerrittranslator.TranslateEvent)
   http.HandleFunc("/translate/github-webhooks", githubtranslator.TranslateEvent)

   // Start the main application's HTTP server on port 8080
   http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil)
}
````
#### Create a Library/Package gerrit-translator-cdevents
Library with the name "gerrit-translator-cdevents" will be created in a separate package/repo.</br>
Declare a struct to hold fields related to translation of Gerrit event.</br>
Implement "TranslateEvent" to translate Gerrit event to CDEvent.

- Example structure of gerrit-translator-cdevents library
````go
package gerrittranslator

type GerritTranslator struct {
   //Fields for Gerrit event Translator
}

func (translator *GerritTranslator) TranslateEvent(req *http.Request) (CDEvent, error) {
	//handle translate Gerrit event to CDEvent
}
````

#### Pros and Cons
This structure can be extended by adding more translator libraries in the future without modifying the main application code.</br>
The problem with this approach anyone who is wanting some custom set of translator would need to write their own main class.

> ### Approach 2 : Creating a Go's plugin system to implement different Translators

Reviewer: I'd probably rename this to "Using Go plugins to implement different Translators"

Build the `gerrit-translator-cdevents` plugin as shared object using `go build -buildmode=plugin`, so that the plugin can be loaded/used from other Golang main application to `TranslateEvent` using Go's [plugin](https://pkg.go.dev/plugin) package.

- Example structure of gerrit-translator-cdevents plugin
````go
package main

type GerritTranslator struct {
   //Fields for Gerrit event Translator
}

func (translator *GerritTranslator) TranslateEvent(event string) {
	//handle translate Gerrit event to CDEvent
}

func main() {
	// Create an instance of the GerritTranslator
	translator := &GerritTranslator{}
  
}
````

#### Pros and Cons

This structure can be extended by adding more translator plugins in the future without having to recompile the entire application.</br>
But the Go plugin system is currently only supported on Unix-like systems and has some limitations, such as the need to compile everything with the same Go version.</br>
Expose the functionality of Go translator plugins as an HTTP/REST API, if this needs be used from other languages.

> ### Approach 3 : Creating Go Plugin System over RPC(gRPC) using HashiCorp's go-plugin

Reviewer: "Using RPC to add new Translators"

Author: updated

> HashiCorp's [`go-plugin`](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin) library simplifies the implementation of a plugin system in Go, it is a Go (golang) plugin system over RPC created by HashiCorp.</br>

Reviewer: `plugin system in Go. It is a`

#### Create a shared interface cdevents-translator
Define an interface "EventTranslator" that represents the common functionality to "TranslateEvent" and will be exposed for plugins to implement.</br>
Different translator plugins can be implemented that communicates over a gRPC connection.

- Example structure of cdevents-translator interface
````go
package cdeventstranslator

type EventTranslator interface {
	TranslateEvent()
}
````

#### Implement gerrit-translator-cdevents plugin
Plugin with the name `gerrit-translator-cdevents` will be created in a separate repo/package.</br>
GerritTranslator needs to implement the cdeventstranslator.EventTranslator interface to handle the translation from Gerrit event to CDEvent and that communicates over a gRPC connection.</br>
Call `plugin.Serve` to serve a plugin from the main function to GRPC server using hashicorp's go-plugin

Build the `gerrit-translator-cdevents` plugin using `go build`, so that the plugin can be loaded/used from other Golang main application to `TranslateEvent`

- Example structure of gerrit-translator-cdevents plugin:
````go
package main

type GerritTranslator struct {

>    //Fields for Gerrit event Translator

Reviewer: nit: `// [.]+`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   // Fields for Gerrit event Translator
```

#### Pros and Cons

- This structure can be extended by adding more translator plugins in the future without having to recompile the entire application.
- The plugins can be developed independently and reside in separate repositories.

> - But the Go plugin system is currently only supported on Unix-like systems and has some limitations, such as the need to compile everything with the same Go version.

Reviewer: I would remove the initial "But"
